.TH SYX 1 "MAY 2008" "Smalltalk YX 0.1.7" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
syx \- Smalltalk YX interpreter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B syx \fIoptions \fB[ -c ] \fB[ -e code ] \fIfile \fB...
.br
.B syx \fIoptions \fB[ -S ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B syx
is the Smalltalk YX command for launching the interpreter.
.br
All files are processed in the order specified.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "-r, --root=\fIDIRECTORY"\fR
Use the alternate system wide
.I root path
for Syx.
.TP
.B "-i, --image=\fIFILE"\fR
Use the alternate system wide
.I image file\fP.
This overrides any
.B SYX_IMAGE_PATH
environment variable.
.TP
.B "-s, --scratch"\fR
Build the environment from scratch and save the image.
Continue the startup and enter the environment.
.TP
.B "-S"\fR
Build the environment from scratch and save the image. Exits once the \fIimage\fP is built.
.TP
.B "-c"\fR
Continue startup process after loading files or evaluating code.
.TP
.B "-e \fICODE"\fR
Evaluate one line of code.
.TP
.B "--recovery=\fIIMAGEFILE"\fR
Load the default image and save the recovered copy of it to \fIIMAGEFILE\fP.
.SH FILES
.I /usr/share/syx/st
.RS
Contains all the Smalltalk files used to create the image from scratch.
The root directory /usr/share/syx can be overridden with the \fB-r, --root\fP option.
.RE
.I /usr/share/syx/default.sim
.RS
The default image loaded on startup. The path can be overridden with the \fISYX_IMAGE_PATH\fP environment variable or with the \fB-i, --image\fP option.
.RE
.I /usr/lib/syx
.RS
This directory contains all the C plugins that are loadable from within Smalltalk.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP SYX_IMAGE_PATH
If non-null the full pathname for an alternate system wide
.I image file\fP.
Overridden by the
.B -i, --image
option.
.SH AUTHOR
Luca Bruno <lethalman88@gmail.com>
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to <lethalman88@gmail.com> or visit the issue tracker at http://syx.googlecode.com/issues/list.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2008 Luca Bruno <lethalman88@@gmail.com>.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.

.SH SEE ALSO
The full documentation for \fIsyx\fP is maintained as a Texinfo manual. If the \fIinfo\fP and \fIsyx\fP programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info syx
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.

